Rewrite the RESTful API tutorial in tooling approach (#8664)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/resources/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina.md

To complete this tutorial, you need:

> 1. [Ballerina Swan Lake](/downloads/) or greater

Author: Changed to `later`.

    ```
    package name is derived as 'restful_service'. Edit the Ballerina.toml to change it.

    Created new package 'restful_service' at /Users/restful-service.
    ```

    This creates a directory named `restful-service` with sample Ballerina code, as shown below. 

    ```
    restful-service
    ├── Ballerina.toml
    └── main.bal
    ```

    - `Ballerina.toml` is the file that makes the folder a Ballerina package. 
    - The `main.bal` file provides the look and feel of a simple Ballerina program. 

2. Open the created package in VS Code.

3. Remove the generated content in the `main.bal` file and open the diagram view in VS Code.

    ![Open diagram view](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/open-diagram-view.gif)

## Create the dataset

An in-memory dataset with three entries is used to keep things simple. Follow the steps below to add the definition of the record and the declaration of the [table](/learn/by-example/table/) that holds the data.

1. Generate the record type corresponding to the request payload of the REST service by providing `CovidEntry` as the name and the sample JSON payload below.

>     >**Note:** You need to update the generated record by adding the pipe symbol to mark the record as a [closed one](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/controlling-openness/) and adding the `readonly` descriptor to the `iso_code` field to make it non-modifiable in order to use it as the key of the table.

Author: Updated as follows.

>**Note:** You need to update the generated record by adding the `readonly` descriptor to the `iso_code` field to make it non-modifiable in order to use it as the key of the table and by adding the pipe symbol to mark the record as a [closed one](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/controlling-openness/).

>     > **Note:** You need to update the generated record by adding the `readonly` descriptor to the `iso_code` field to make it non-modifiable in order to use it as the key of the table and by adding the pipe symbol to mark the record as a [closed one](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/controlling-openness/).

Author: Done.

    ```json
    {
        "iso_code": "AFG",
        "country": "Afghanistan",
        "cases": 159303,
        "deaths": 7386,
        "recovered": 146084,
        "active": 5833
    }
    ```

    ![Create data record](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-data-record.gif)

    The generated record type will be as follows.

    ```ballerina

>     type CovidEntry record {|

Reviewer: There is an indentation issue here

Author: Fixed.

> 

Reviewer 2: Shall we have this before L95?

Author: Done.

        readonly string iso_code;
        string country;
        int cases;
        int deaths;
        int recovered;
        int active;
    |};
    ```

2. Create the table, as shown below.

>     >**Note:** Select the `final` modifier and enter `CovidEntry` as the row type corresponding to the type of the members of the table, `iso_code` as the key, and `covidTable` as the variable name when creating the table.

Reviewer 2: No mention of the RHS table constructor expression selection here, even though that's done first.

I would go left to right btw, and update the expression at last.

Author: Updated the note as follows:

 >**Note:** Select the `final` modifier, change the variable type to `table with key` expression, select `CovidEntry` as the row type corresponding to the type of the members of the table, enter `iso_code` as the key, enter `covidTable` as the variable name, and select the `table` expression as the value of the table, when creating the table.

>     >**Note:** Select the `final` modifier, change the variable type to `table with key` expression, select `CovidEntry` as the row type corresponding to the type of the members of the table, enter `iso_code` as the key, enter `covidTable` as the variable name, and select the `table` expression as the value of the table, when creating the table.

Reviewer 2: If we are emphasizing, it has to be an exact match

`table with key` -> `Table with Key-Fields`

Reviewer 2: Space between > and ** ?

Author: Updated. There are no extra spaces rendered, as shown below.

<img width="908" alt="Screenshot 2024-03-01 at 18 18 49" src="https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/assets/11707273/734386ec-8d47-40d9-861e-b2f203a5b5c6">

Author: Updated the space between > and ** also.

>     ![Create data table](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-data-table.gif)

Reviewer 2: There seems to be an issue with this GIF at the end. Shows erroneous code on the table member type.

Author: Updated.

3. Replace the `{key: value}` placeholder of the generated table with the following entries to add the initial data to the table.

    ```
    {iso_code: "AFG", country: "Afghanistan", cases: 159303, deaths: 7386, recovered: 146084, active: 5833},
    {iso_code: "SL", country: "Sri Lanka", cases: 598536, deaths: 15243, recovered: 568637, active: 14656},
    {iso_code: "US", country: "USA", cases: 69808350, deaths: 880976, recovered: 43892277, active: 25035097}
    ```

The generated record and the table will be as follows.

```ballerina
type CovidEntry record {|
    readonly string iso_code;
    string country;
    int cases;
    int deaths;
    int recovered;
    int active;
|};

final table<CovidEntry> key(iso_code) covidTable = table [
    {iso_code: "AFG", country: "Afghanistan", cases: 159303, deaths: 7386, recovered: 146084, active: 5833},
    {iso_code: "SL", country: "Sri Lanka", cases: 598536, deaths: 15243, recovered: 568637, active: 14656},
    {iso_code: "US", country: "USA", cases: 69808350, deaths: 880976, recovered: 43892277, active: 25035097}

>     ];

Reviewer: There should not be a indentation here right? Ballerina vscode formatter removes this

Author: Fixed.

- The `GET` request is to get data; the response should be `200 OK`.
- The `POST` request is to add data; the response should be `201 Created`.

### The second endpoint

The second endpoint is about getting data filtered from the service. The data is filtered by the ISO code. Therefore, the second endpoint accepts the ISO code as part of the URL and responds with the `200 OK` status code. The relevant error is sent back to the client in the event of an error.

>**Info:** For the complete source code of this implementation, see [The complete code](/learn/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/#the-complete-code).

## Create the service package 

Ballerina uses packages to group code. Follow the steps below to create a Ballerina package and write the business logic. 

> **Info:** For more information on Ballerina packages, see [Organize Ballerina code](/learn/organize-ballerina-code/).

1. In the terminal, execute the command below to create the Ballerina package for the API implementation.

    ```
    $ bal new covid19 -t service
    ```

>     You can view the output below.

Author: This is just a change of wording or the language. Basically, just another way of saying it.  What is the improvement required here?

    ```
    Created new package 'covid19' at covid19.
    ```

    This creates a directory named `covid19` with the default module along with a sample code for the service, as shown below. 

    ```
    .
    ├── covid19
    │   ├── Ballerina.toml

>     │   └── service.bal

Author: Updated.

>     │   └── service.bal

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/8664#discussion_r1493875359.

    ```

>     - `Ballerina.toml` is the file that makes the folder a Ballerina package. It also contains a test directory to include tests for the service. However, this will not be used in this guide. 

Author: Updated.

>     - `Ballerina.toml` is the file that makes the folder a Ballerina package. It also contains a test directory to include tests for the service. However, this will not be used in this guide. 

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/8664#discussion_r1493875359.

    - The `service.bal` template file provides a look and feel about Ballerina services. 

> 2. In the terminal, navigate to the directory of the created package and execute the `code .` command to open it in VS Code.

Author: Updated.

## Create the dataset

An in-memory dataset with three entries is used to keep things simple. Follow the steps below to add the definition of the record and the declaration of the table.

> 1. Remove the auto-generated content of the API template file (i.e., `service.bal`) and open the **Overview Diagram** view in VS Code.

Author: Updated the `bal new` command to not create a template, changed the tree output accordingly,  and removed the content on creating the `tests` directory.

> 1. Remove the auto-generated content of the API template file (i.e., `service.bal`) and open the **Overview Diagram** view in VS Code.

Reviewer 3: IMO we should use templates and go ahead with option 2 above?

> 1. Remove the auto-generated content of the API template file (i.e., `service.bal`) and open the **Overview Diagram** view in VS Code.

Reviewer: With the template option the generated code also has tests. So we need to modify the tests or remove them for clarity. 

The template option produces a service and some test cases. Then we modify the generated service i.e. we edit the basepath and remove the resource using the diagram view.

IMO we get a better experience if we use the diagram view to add the service and then edit the existing default resource

> 1. Remove the auto-generated content of the API template file (i.e., `service.bal`) and open the **Overview Diagram** view in VS Code.

Author: Had discussions and decided to go ahead with the `main.bal` file (without using the service template).

    ![Open diagram view](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/open-diagram-view.gif)

2. Generate the record types corresponding to the payload from the REST service by providing the sample JSON object below.

    ```json
    {
        "iso_code": "AFG",
        "country": "Afghanistan",
        "cases": 159303,
        "deaths": 7386,
        "recovered": 146084,
        "active": 5833
    }
    ```
    ![Create data record](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-data-record.gif)

>     >**Tip:** You need to complete the generated record by adding the `public` keyword to the record, the pipe signs to mark the record as a closed one, and adding the `readonly` modifier to the `iso_code` variable, which cannot be represented in the JSON format.

Author: Updated as: "...adding the `readonly` field descriptor to the `iso_code` variable as it is the key of the table..."

            country: "Sri Lanka", 
            cases: 598536, 
            deaths: 15243, 
            recovered: 568637, 
            active: 14656
        },
        {
            iso_code: "US", 
            country: "USA", 
            cases: 69808350, 
            deaths: 880976, 
            recovered: 43892277, 
            active: 25035097
        }
    ```
The generated record and the table will be as follows.

```ballerina
public type CovidEntry record {
    readonly string iso_code;
    string country;
    int cases;
    int deaths;
    int recovered;
    int active;
};

public final table<CovidEntry> key(iso_code) covidTable = table [
    {
        iso_code: "AFG", 
        country: "Afghanistan", 
        cases: 159303, 
        deaths: 7386, 
        recovered: 146084, 
        active: 5833
    },
    {
        iso_code: "SL", 
        country: "Sri Lanka", 
        cases: 598536, 
        deaths: 15243, 
        recovered: 568637, 
        active: 14656
    },
    {
        iso_code: "US", 
        country: "USA", 
        cases: 69808350, 
        deaths: 880976, 
        recovered: 43892277, 
        active: 25035097
    }
];
```

In this code:

> - Ballerina tables are used to store data. A Ballerina record represents each entry in the table.

Author: Removed and added the link to https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/table/.

### The first endpoint

The first endpoint is about getting data from the service and adding data to the service. Therefore, the service should handle HTTP `GET` and `POST` requests.
- The `GET` request is to retrieve data; the response should be `200 OK`.
- The `POST` request is to add data; the response should be `201 Created`.

### The second endpoint

The second endpoint is about getting data filtered from the service. The data is filtered by the ISO code. Therefore, the second endpoint accepts the ISO code as part of the URL and responds with the `200 OK` status code. The relevant error is sent back to the client in the event of an error.

>**Info:** For the complete source code of this implementation, see [The complete code](/learn/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/#the-complete-code).

## Create the package 

Ballerina uses packages to group code. Follow the steps below to create a Ballerina package and write the business logic. 

> **Info:** For more information on Ballerina packages, see [Organize Ballerina code](/learn/organize-ballerina-code/).

1. In the terminal, execute the command below to create the Ballerina package for the API implementation.

    ```

>     $ bal new write-a-restful-api

Reviewer 3: Yes agreed. we will have to redo all the gifs with the name change. having verbs in package name is not a good practice. Observed the same in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/8674#discussion_r1496517019

>     $ bal new write-a-restful-api

Reviewer 3: Also why did we remove service creation template option?

>     $ bal new write-a-restful-api

Author: @anupama-pathirage - Changed the package name based on https://ballerina.io/learn/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/#step-2-develop-the-service to be consistent with it as that was the reference used.

>     $ bal new write-a-restful-api

Author: Discussed and decided to go with `restful-service` as the package name because it is more meaningful in the context of the guide.

    ```

>     You should see the output similar to the following.

Author: We need `the` article here for the noun `output`. The explanation is as follows:

Yes, including "the" in the sentence makes it grammatically correct. So it would be: "You should see the output similar to the following." This usage indicates a specific output that the reader should expect to encounter.

>     You should see the output similar to the following.

Author: Changed to: `You should see an output similar to the following.`

    ```
    package name is derived as 'write_a_restful_api'. Edit the Ballerina.toml to change it.

    Created new package 'write_a_restful_api' at /Users/write-a-restful-api.
    ```

    This creates a directory named `write-a-restful-api` with sample Ballerina code, as shown below. 

    ```
    .
    ├── Ballerina.toml
    └── main.bal
    ```

    - `Ballerina.toml` is the file that makes the folder a Ballerina package. 
    - The `main.bal` file provides the look and feel of a simple Ballerina program. 

2. Open the created package in VS Code.

3. Remove the generated content in the `main.bal` file and open the diagram view in VS Code.

> 

Reviewer 3: Extra new lines?

Author: <img width="882" alt="Screenshot 2024-02-21 at 09 47 57" src="https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/assets/11707273/1df27ced-86d5-4eeb-ad73-df35a043b2df">

Author: This doesn't have extra new lines. @anupama-pathirage

    ![Open diagram view](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/open-diagram-view.gif)

## Create the dataset

An in-memory dataset with three entries is used to keep things simple. Follow the steps below to add the definition of the record and the declaration of the [table](/learn/by-example/table/) that holds the data.

1. Generate the record types corresponding to the payload of the REST service by providing the record name as `CovidEntry` and the sample JSON object below.

>     >**Tip:** You need to complete the generated record by adding the pipe signs to mark the record as a closed one and adding the `readonly` descriptor to the `iso_code` field to make it non-modifiable as it is the key of the table, which cannot be represented in the JSON format.

Author: Updated.

    ```json
    {
        "iso_code": "AFG",
        "country": "Afghanistan",
        "cases": 159303,
        "deaths": 7386,
        "recovered": 146084,
        "active": 5833
    }
    ```
    ![Create data record](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-data-record.gif)

> 

Reviewer 2: With integration tutorials, we also added the generated code after a step like this.

https://ballerina.io/learn/integration-tutorials/service-orchestration/#step-2-develop-the-service

Author: Updated.

2. Create the table, as shown below.

>     >**Tip:** Enter `CovidEntry` as the table type, `iso_code` as the key, and `covidTable` as the variable type when creating the table.

Author: Normally, `Tip` is used in documentation to give details that will be important for the users. Here, `Tip` is more suitable as users can enter any value based on their preference and this is not something to note and do without missing.

>     >**Tip:** Enter `CovidEntry` as the table type, `iso_code` as the key, and `covidTable` as the variable type when creating the table.

Reviewer 2: If these are independent identifiers, constructs, etc. yes. But, in this case, we need to refer to the `readonly` field as the key, and therefore, use the field of that name, which is `iso_code`. So while it is flexible, we rely on previous names a bit, so Note is better in this case IMO.

>     >**Tip:** Enter `CovidEntry` as the table type, `iso_code` as the key, and `covidTable` as the variable type when creating the table.

Author: Changed `Tip` -> `Note`.

    ![Create data table](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-data-table.gif)

3. Replace the `{key: value}` placeholder of the generated table with the following entries to add the initial data to the table.

    ```
        {
            iso_code: "AFG", 
            country: "Afghanistan", 
            cases: 159303, 
            deaths: 7386, 
            recovered: 146084, 
            active: 5833
        },
        {
            iso_code: "SL", 
            country: "Sri Lanka", 
            cases: 598536, 
            deaths: 15243, 
            recovered: 568637, 
            active: 14656
        },
        {
            iso_code: "US", 
            country: "USA", 
            cases: 69808350, 
            deaths: 880976, 
            recovered: 43892277, 
            active: 25035097
        }
    ```

> The generated record and the table will be as follows.

Reviewer 3: Instead of expanded version, can we have single line initialization which is compact.

``` 
{iso_code: "AFG", country: "Afghanistan", cases: 159303, deaths: 7386, recovered: 146084, active: 5833},
{iso_code: "SL", country: "Sri Lanka", cases: 598536, deaths: 15243, recovered: 568637, active: 14656},
{iso_code: "US", country: "USA", cases: 69808350, deaths: 880976, recovered: 43892277, active: 25035097}
```

> The generated record and the table will be as follows.

Author: Updated.

```ballerina

> type CovidEntry record {|

Reviewer 3: Seems this code block is not indented with the text above.

Author: It is not indented because the code block belongs to all the steps and not only the last one. @anupama-pathirage

Reviewer 3: Ack

    readonly string iso_code;
    string country;
    int cases;
    int deaths;
    int recovered;
    int active;
|};

final table<CovidEntry> key(iso_code) covidTable = table [
    {
        iso_code: "AFG",
        country: "Afghanistan",
        cases: 159303,
        deaths: 7386,
        recovered: 146084,
        active: 5833
    },
    {
        iso_code: "SL",
        country: "Sri Lanka",
        cases: 598536,
        deaths: 15243,
        recovered: 568637,
        active: 14656
    },
    {
        iso_code: "US",
        country: "USA",
        cases: 69808350,
        deaths: 880976,
        recovered: 43892277,
        active: 25035097

>     }

Reviewer 3: Need to update this also along with https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/8664/files#r1496589026

Reviewer 3: We will have to update the gifs also. Anyway we have to redo based on https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/8664/files#r1496577265

## Implement the first endpoint

The first endpoint has two resources: one to retrieve data and the other to add data.

### Create the first resource to get data

> Create the first resource of the first endpoint to get data using the [Ballerina HTTP API Designer](/learn/vs-code-extension/design-the-services/http-api-designer/) in VS Code, as shown below.

Author: Fixed.

> >**Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries`. Use `CovidEntry[]`as the response type and introduce the logic to return the data in the table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries`. Use `CovidEntry[]` as the response type and introduce the logic to return the data in the table.
```

![Create GET resource](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-get-resource.gif)

> The generated code for the updated resource method will be as follows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The updated resource method will be as follows.
```

In this code:

- Unlike normal functions, resource methods can have accessors. In this case, the accessor is set to `get`, which means only HTTP `GET` requests could hit this resource. Ballerina automatically serializes Ballerina records as JSON and sends them over the wire. 
- The default HTTP response status code for a resource method other than `post` is `200 OK`. The default HTTP response status code for an HTTP `POST` resource is `201 Created`. 

### Create the second resource to add data

> Create the second resource of the first endpoint to add new COVID-19 data to the dataset by ISO code, using the [Ballerina HTTP API Designer](/learn/vs-code-extension/design-the-services/http-api-designer/) in VS Code, as shown below.

Reviewer: This section does not mention about creating a `StatusCodeResponse` and what that means in the context of response.

Author: Changed to the following.

Two types of records, the `CovidEntry[]`, which represents the `http:Created` response, and the `IsoCodesConflict`, which represents the `http:Conflict` status code response, will be used as the return types.

> Create the second resource of the first endpoint to add new COVID-19 data to the dataset by ISO code, using the [Ballerina HTTP API Designer](/learn/vs-code-extension/design-the-services/http-api-designer/) in VS Code, as shown below.

Reviewer: Why are we repeating the link here? Giving it once should be enough right?

Author: That should be fine as a user who directly checks only this section will miss the link otherwise.

Author: Removed.

>**Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]` type payload named `covidEntries`. Use `CovidEntry[]` and `ConflictingIsoCodesError` as the response types.

![Create POST resource](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-post-resource.gif)

Implement the logic of this `POST` resource function with the code below.

```ballerina
resource function post countries(CovidEntry[] covidEntries)
                                returns CovidEntry[]|ConflictingIsoCodesError {

    string[] conflictingISOs = from CovidEntry covidEntry in covidEntries
        where covidTable.hasKey(covidEntry.iso_code)
        select covidEntry.iso_code;

    if conflictingISOs.length() > 0 {
        return {
            body: string:'join(" ", "Conflicting ISO Codes:", ...conflictingISOs)
        };

>     } else {

Reviewer: The `else` part is redundant here right?

Author: Removed.

- This resource has an argument named `covidEntries`, which means the resource expects a payload with the `CovidEntry[]` type. Two types of records, `CovidEntry[]` and `ConflictingIsoCodesError`, will be used as the return types.

## Implement the second endpoint

The second endpoint has only one resource to get COVID-19 data filtered by the ISO code.

### Create the resource of the second endpoint

Similar to how you created the [second resource of the first endpoint](#create-the-second-resource-to-add-data), create the resource of the second endpoint below using the diagram view in VS Code.

>**Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts the `iso_code` path parameter. Define and use `InvalidIsoCodeError` along with `CovidEntry[]` as the response types.
![Create second GET resource](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-second-get-resource.gif)

Implement the logic of this `GET` resource function with the code below.

```ballerina
resource function get countries/[string iso_code]() returns CovidEntry|InvalidIsoCodeError {

>     CovidEntry? covidEntry = covidTable[iso_code];

Reviewer: We can use the `hasKey` and `getKey` methods here right?

Reviewer 2: Shall we do these code improvements separately? Kinda out of scope for this task, IMO.

Reviewer 2: But, we'll have to redo the GIFs then, so may be we'll have to do that first.

Reviewer 2: Shall we finalize the code in a comment before proceeding with the GIFs?

Author: Done.

    if covidEntry is () {
        return {
            body: string `Invalid ISO Code: ${iso_code}`
        };
    }
    return covidEntry;
}
```

In this code:

> - This resource is different from the first two resources. As explained earlier, resource methods have accessors.

Reviewer: What does this means? The two sentences does not make sense. It is different since it has a path parameter?

Author: Updated as follows:

In this code:
- Resource methods also support hierarchical paths, making it ideal for implementing RESTful APIs. Hierarchical paths can have path parameters.
- This resource is different from the first two resources because it has a path parameter.
- In this case, `iso_code` is used as the path param, which, in turn, becomes a `string` variable.

In this code:

- Unlike normal functions, resource methods can have accessors. In this case, the accessor is set to `get`, which means only HTTP `GET` requests could hit this resource. Ballerina automatically serializes Ballerina records as JSON and sends them over the wire. 
- The default HTTP response status code for a resource method other than `post` is `200 OK`. The default HTTP response status code for an HTTP `POST` resource is `201 Created`. 

### Create the second resource to add data

> Create the second resource of the first endpoint to add new COVID-19 data to the dataset by ISO code, using the Ballerina HTTP API Designer in VS Code, as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create the second resource of the first endpoint to add new data to the dataset by ISO code, using the Ballerina HTTP API Designer in VS Code, as shown below.
```

> >**Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]` type payload named `covidEntries`. Use `CovidEntry[]` and `IsoCodeConflict` as the response types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and a `CovidEntry[]`-typed `covidEntries` parameter corresponding to the payload. Use `CovidEntry[]` and `IsoCodeConflict` as the response types.
```

Reviewer 2: Since `IsoCodeConflict` is only generated here, we can't directly say use it as a response type, IMO. We need to mention generating it.

Author: Updated the note as follows.

>**Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]` type payload named `covidEntries`, create a `201 Created` response with the `CovidEntry[]` as the body type, and also create a `409 Conflict` response with `string` as the body type by generating a `IsoCodeConflict` record type of the `http:Conflict` status code response.

> > **Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]` type payload named `covidEntries`, create a `201 Created` response with the `CovidEntry[]` as the body type, and also create a `409 Conflict` response with `string` as the body type by generating a `IsoCodeConflict` record type of the `http:Conflict` status code response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]`-typed parameter named `covidEntries`.
```

> create a `201 Created` response with the `CovidEntry[]` as the body type, and also create a `409 Conflict` response with `string` as the body type by generating a `IsoCodeConflict` record type of the `http:Conflict` status code response.

These I'd make separate sentences
- it's more selecting the response payload type rather than creating a 201 response in the first case
- second one I would mention status code response and link to the BBE

Then, need to also say use these as response/return types

Also, payload type may be more appropriate than body type. Please check with Tharmi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]`-typed payload parameter named `covidEntries`. Upon successful creation of covid entries, the resource should return the `CovidEntry[]` as the response payload. This can be done by selecting `CovidEntry[]` as the default(`201 Created`) response type. Additionally, in case of conflict entries, the resource should return a `409 Conflict` response with `string` payload. This can be done by generating a [status code response](/learn/by-example/http-send-different-status-codes-with-payload/) by selecting the response status code as `409 - conflict, the payload type as `string` and give `IsoCodeConflict` as the status code record name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Define an HTTP resource, which allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]`-typed parameter named `covidEntries`, corresponding to the payload. Upon successful creation of the entries, the response shoud be a `201` response with payload of structure `CovidEntry[]`. This can be incorporated in the return type by selecting `CovidEntry[]` as the default (`201 Created`) response type. Additionally, in case of conflicting entries, the resource should return a `409 Conflict` response with a `string` payload. This can be done by generating a `409` [status code response](/learn/by-example/http-send-different-status-codes-with-payload/) by selecting the response status code as `409 - Conflict`, the payload type as `string`, and providing a name (`IsoCodeConflict` ) for the status code record.
```

![Create POST resource](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-post-resource.gif)

> Implement the logic of this `POST` resource function with the code below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implement the logic of this `POST` resource method with the code below.
```

Let's check wherever applicable for consistency.

Author: Updated all occurrences.

> > **Note:** Define an HTTP resource, which allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]`-typed parameter named `covidEntries`, corresponding to the payload. Upon successful creation of the entries, the response shoud be a `201` response with payload of structure `CovidEntry[]`. This can be incorporated in the return type by selecting `CovidEntry[]` as the default (`201 Created`) response type. Additionally, in case of conflicting entries, the resource should return a `409 Conflict` response with a `string` payload. This can be included in the return type by generating a `409` [status code response](/learn/by-example/http-send-different-status-codes-with-payload/) by selecting the response status code as `409 - Conflict`, the payload type as `string`, and providing a name (`IsoCodeConflict` ) for the status code record.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Define an HTTP resource, which allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]`-typed parameter named `covidEntries`, corresponding to the payload. Upon successful creation of the entries, the response shoud be a `201` response with payload of structure `CovidEntry[]`. This can be incorporated in the return type by selecting `CovidEntry[]` as the default (`201 Created`) response type. Additionally, in case of conflicting entries, the resource should return a `409 Conflict` response with a `string` payload. This can be included in the return type by generating a `409` [status code response](/learn/by-example/http-send-different-status-codes-with-payload/) by selecting `409 - Conflict` as the response status code and `string` as the payload type and providing a name (`IsoCodeConflict` ) for the status code record.
```

```ballerina
resource function post countries(CovidEntry[] covidEntries)
        returns CovidEntry[]|IsoCodeConflict {

    string[] conflictingISOs = from CovidEntry covidEntry in covidEntries
        where covidTable.hasKey(covidEntry.iso_code)
        select covidEntry.iso_code;

    if conflictingISOs.length() > 0 {
        return {
            body: string:'join(" ", "Conflicting ISO Codes:", ...conflictingISOs)
        };
    }

    covidEntries.forEach(covidEntry => covidTable.add(covidEntry));
    return covidEntries;
}
```

In this code:

- It is chosen to accept the entire payload or send back an error.

> - This resource has an argument named `covidEntries`, which means the resource expects a payload with the `CovidEntry[]` type. Two types of records, the `CovidEntry[]`, which represents the `http:Created` response, and the `IsoCodeConflict`, which represents the `http:Conflict` status code response, will be used as the return types.

Reviewer 2: The name doesn't matter for the payload. We have to emphasize the type, rather than the variable name.

Reviewer 2: which represents the `http:Created` response -> which corresponds to a `201 Created` response

Author: Updated.

> - This resource expects a payload with the `CovidEntry[]` type. Two types of records, the `CovidEntry[]`, which corresponds to a `201 Created` response, and the `IsoCodeConflict`, which corresponds to a `409 Conflict` status code response, will be used as the return types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- This resource expects a payload that matches the `CovidEntry[]` type. Two types, `CovidEntry[]`, which corresponds to a `201 Created` response, and `IsoCodeConflict`, which corresponds to a `409 Conflict` status code response, will be used as the return types.
```

## Implement the second endpoint

The second endpoint has only one resource to get COVID-19 data filtered by the ISO code.

### Create the resource of the second endpoint

Similar to how you created the [second resource of the first endpoint](#create-the-second-resource-to-add-data), create the resource of the second endpoint below using the diagram view in VS Code.

> >**Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts the `iso_code` path parameter. Define and use `IsoCodeNotFound` along with `CovidEntry[]` as the response types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts the `iso_code` path parameter. Define and use `IsoCodeNotFound` along with `CovidEntry` as the response types.
```

Author: Fixed.

> > **Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts the `iso_code` path parameter, create a `200 OK` response with the `CovidEntry` as the body type, and also create a `404 Not Found` response with `string` as the body type by generating a `IsoCodeNotFound` record type of the `http:NotFound` status code response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts the `iso_code` path parameter. As the return type, use `CovidEntry` as the `200 OK` (default status code) response payload type. Also generate and use a record type (`IsoCodeNotFound`) for the error response by selecting `404 Not Found` as the code and `string` as the body type.
```

## Implement the first endpoint

The first endpoint has two resources: one to get data and the other to add data.

### Create the first resource to get data

Create the first resource of the first endpoint to get data using the [Ballerina HTTP API Designer](/learn/vs-code-extension/design-the-services/http-api-designer/) in VS Code, as shown below.

![Create GET resource](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-get-resource.gif)

The generated resource function will be as follows.

```ballerina

> service /covid/status on new http:Listener(9000) {

Author: Fixed.

## Implement the first endpoint

The first endpoint has two resources: one to retrieve data and the other to add data.

### Create the first resource to get data

Create the first resource of the first endpoint to get data using the [Ballerina HTTP API Designer](/learn/vs-code-extension/design-the-services/http-api-designer/) in VS Code, as shown below.

> >**Tip:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries`. Use `CovidEntry[]`as the response type and replace the auto-generated  body of the resource with `return covidTable.toArray()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
>**Tip:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries`. Use `CovidEntry[]` as the response type and replace the auto-generated body of the resource with `return covidTable.toArray()`.
```

> >**Tip:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries`. Use `CovidEntry[]`as the response type and replace the auto-generated  body of the resource with `return covidTable.toArray()`.

Author: Updated.

In this code:

- Unlike normal functions, resource methods can have accessors. In this case, the accessor is set to `get`, which means only HTTP `GET` requests could hit this resource. Ballerina automatically serializes Ballerina records as JSON and sends them over the wire. 
- The default HTTP response status code for a resource method other than `post` is `200 OK`. The default HTTP response status code for an HTTP `POST` resource is `201 Created`. 

### Create the second resource to add data

Before creating the second resource, you need to create the records of the custom error types, as shown below.

#### Define the error detail records

> You need to define the error detail records below for the second resource of the first endpoint.

Reviewer 2: Let's avoid terms like error detail and use something like conflict response payload.

Author: Updated.

```ballerina

> public type ErrorMsg record {|

Reviewer 2: Shall we get rid of ErrorMsg and directly use a string body instead? Simplifies the rest, right?

If not, I think we should just define `ErrorMsg` as something like `ConflictPayload` and describe this as the payload.

Author: Fixed.

    string errmsg;
|};

> public type ConflictingIsoCodesError record {|

Reviewer 2: Should come after the relevant GIF?

Author: Updated.

    *http:Conflict;
    ErrorMsg body;
|};
```

Create the first error detail record, as shown below.

>**Tip:** You can create the second error detail record when [creating the second resource](#create-the-second-resource).

![Create error detail record](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-error-record.gif)

In this code:

> - Ballerina uses `*http:Conflict` to denote that one type is a subtype of another. In this case, `ConflictingIsoCodesError` is a subtype of `http:Conflict`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `*http:Conflict` is used to include all the fields of `http:Conflict` in the custom `ConflictingIsoCodesError` record. This definition of `ConflictingIsoCodesError` makes it a subtype of `http:Conflict`.
```

Author: This section is removed now.

In this code:

- Unlike normal functions, resource methods can have accessors. In this case, the accessor is set to `get`, which means only HTTP `GET` requests could hit this resource. Ballerina automatically serializes Ballerina records as JSON and sends them over the wire. 
- The default HTTP response status code for a resource method other than `post` is `200 OK`. The default HTTP response status code for an HTTP `POST` resource is `201 Created`. 

### Create the second resource to add data

Create the second resource of the first endpoint to add new COVID-19 data to the dataset by ISO code, using the [Ballerina HTTP API Designer](/learn/vs-code-extension/design-the-services/http-api-designer/) in VS Code, as shown below.

> >**Tip:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]` type payload named `covidEntries`. Use `CovidEntry[]` and `ConflictingIsoCodesError` as the response types.

Reviewer: +1

> >**Tip:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `POST` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts a `CovidEntry[]` type payload named `covidEntries`. Use `CovidEntry[]` and `ConflictingIsoCodesError` as the response types.

Author: Discussed and will go ahead with the error records below.

- `IsoCodeConflict`
- `IsoCodeNotFound`

![Create POST resource](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-post-resource.gif)

Implement the logic of this `POST` resource function with the code below.

```ballerina
resource function post countries(CovidEntry[] covidEntries)
                                returns CovidEntry[]|ConflictingIsoCodesError {

    string[] conflictingISOs = from CovidEntry covidEntry in covidEntries
        where covidTable.hasKey(covidEntry.iso_code)
        select covidEntry.iso_code;

    if conflictingISOs.length() > 0 {
        return {
            body: string:'join(" ", "Conflicting ISO Codes:", ...conflictingISOs)
        };
    } else {
        covidEntries.forEach(covidEntry => covidTable.add(covidEntry));
        return covidEntries;
    }
}
```

In this code:

> - It is chosen to accept the entire payload or send back an error. Copying this straightway results in an error, which is expected as the `ConflictingIsoCodesError` type is not defined yet.

Author: Removed.

The second endpoint has only one resource to get COVID-19 data filtered by the ISO code.

### Create the resource of the second endpoint

Similar to how you created the [second resource of the first endpoint](#create-the-second-resource-to-add-data), create the resource of the second endpoint below using the diagram view in VS Code.

>**Tip:** Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on the resource path `countries` and accepts the `iso_code` path parameter. Use `CovidEntry[]` and `InvalidIsoCodeError` as the response types.
![Create second GET resource](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/create-second-get-resource.gif)

Implement the logic of this `GET` resource function with the code below.

```ballerina
resource function get countries/[string iso_code]() returns CovidEntry|InvalidIsoCodeError {
    CovidEntry? covidEntry = covidTable[iso_code];
    if covidEntry is () {
        return {
            body: string `Invalid ISO Code: ${iso_code}`
        };
    }
    return covidEntry;
}
```

In this code:
- This resource is different from the first two resources. As explained earlier, resource methods have accessors.

> - It also supports hierarchical paths, making it ideal for implementing RESTful APIs. Hierarchical paths can have path params.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- It also supports hierarchical paths, making it ideal for implementing RESTful APIs. Hierarchical paths can have path parameters.
```

> - It also supports hierarchical paths, making it ideal for implementing RESTful APIs. Hierarchical paths can have path params.

Author: Changed to `Resource methods also support hierarchical paths,...` to make it clearer.

        return covidTable.toArray();
    }

    resource function post countries(CovidEntry[] covidEntries)
            returns CovidEntry[]|IsoCodeConflict {

        string[] conflictingISOs = from CovidEntry covidEntry in covidEntries
            where covidTable.hasKey(covidEntry.iso_code)
            select covidEntry.iso_code;

        if conflictingISOs.length() > 0 {
            return {
                body: string:'join(" ", "Conflicting ISO Codes:", ...conflictingISOs)
            };
        }

        covidEntries.forEach(covidEntry => covidTable.add(covidEntry));
        return covidEntries;
    }

    resource function get countries/[string iso_code]() returns CovidEntry|IsoCodeNotFound {
        if covidTable.hasKey(iso_code) {
            return covidTable.get(iso_code);
        }
        return {
            body: string `Invalid ISO Code: ${iso_code}`
        };
    }
}

type CovidEntry record {|
    readonly string iso_code;
    string country;

>     decimal cases;

Reviewer 2: Aren't these ints now?

Reviewer 2: Please compare the whole thing against what you get when following the steps.

Author: Changed to `int`.

In this code:

- It is chosen to accept the entire payload or send back an error. Copying this straightway results in an error, which is expected as the `ConflictingIsoCodesError` type is not defined yet.

> - This resource has an argument named `covidEntries` annotated with `@http:Payload`, which means the resource expects a payload with the `CovideEntry[]` type. Two types of records, `CovideEntry[]` and `ConflictingIsoCodesError`, will be used as the return values.

Reviewer 2: We can get rid of @http:Payload now.

Also typo in CovideEntry?

Reviewer 2: as the return values -> as the return types

Author: Fixed.

## Implement the second endpoint

The second endpoint has only one resource to get COVID-19 data filtered by the ISO code.

### Define the error detail record

Similar to how you created the error detail record in [define the error detail records](#define-the-error-detail-records), define the error detail record below of the second endpoint using the diagram view in VS Code.

```ballerina
public type InvalidIsoCodeError record {|

>     *http:NotFound;

Reviewer 2: May have to redo this also.

Author: Fixed.

    ErrorMsg body;
|};
```

In this code:

> - As in the previous example, this resource also includes its return types. However, the basic principle behind them is as the previous example. 

Reviewer 2: " resource also includes its return" is not clear IMO. Do we need this at all?

Author: Removed.

    decimal active;
|};

final table<CovidEntry> key(iso_code) covidTable = table [
    {iso_code: "AFG", country: "Afghanistan", cases: 159303, deaths: 7386, recovered: 146084, active: 5833},
    {iso_code: "SL", country: "Sri Lanka", cases: 598536, deaths: 15243, recovered: 568637, active: 14656},
    {iso_code: "US", country: "USA", cases: 69808350, deaths: 880976, recovered: 43892277, active: 25035097}
];

type IsoCodeConflict record {|
    *http:Conflict;
    string body;
|};

type IsoCodeNotFound record {|
    *http:NotFound;
    string body;
|};
```

## Run the service

Use the [**Run**](/learn/vs-code-extension/run-a-program/) CodeLens of the VS Code extension to build and run the service, as shown below.

![Run the service](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/run-the-service.gif)

> >**Info:** Alternatively, you can run this service by navigating to the project root (i.e., the `restful-service` directory) and executing the `bal run` command. The console should have warning logs related to the isolatedness of resources. It is a built-in [service concurrency safety](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#concurrency-safety) feature of Ballerina.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>**Info:** Alternatively, you can run this service by navigating to the project root (i.e., the `restful-service` directory) and executing the `bal run` command. The console would have warning logs related to the resource methods not being called concurrently. They are due to the built-in [service concurrency safety](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#concurrency-safety) feature of Ballerina.
```

> You should see the output similar to the following.

Reviewer 2: Same comment re: the.

Author: This should be grammatically correct to have the `an` article as follows.

`You should see an output similar to the following.`

Author: Updated.

> 

Reviewer: The command is not there for OpenAPI generation. Also should we add this as bullet points to the topic. Better to have them as Tip or Note

Author: Updated as follows:

>**Info:** It is always a good practice to document your interfaces. However, this example has omitted documentation for brevity. Nevertheless, any production-ready API interface must include API documentation. You can also try [generating an OpenAPI specification for the written service](/learn/openapi-tool/) by executing the `bal openapi -i main.bal` command, which creates a `yaml` file in the current folder.

You should see the output similar to the following.

```
Compiling source
        featured_scenarios/write_a_restful_api:0.1.0
HINT [main.bal:(40:5,40:5)] concurrent calls will not be made to this method since the method is not an 'isolated' method
HINT [main.bal:(43:5,43:5)] concurrent calls will not be made to this method since the method is not an 'isolated' method
HINT [main.bal:(61:5,61:5)] concurrent calls will not be made to this method since the method is not an 'isolated' method

Running executable
```

## Try the service

Use the [**Try it**](/learn/vs-code-extension/try-the-services/try-http-services/) CodeLens of the VS Code extension to send a request to the service to try out the use case.

### Get all countries

Retrieve all the available records of all countries, as shown below.

![Get all countries](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/get-all-countries.gif)

### Add a country by the ISO code 

Add a record of a country by its ISO code by passing the following payload, as shown below.

```json

> {

Reviewer: Payload should be an array right?

Author: Updated as follows:

```json
[
    {
    "iso_code": "DEU",
    "country": "Germany",
    "cases": 159333.0,
    "deaths": 7390.0,
    "recovered": 126084.0,
    "active": 6833.0
    }
]
```

    decimal active;
|};

final table<CovidEntry> key(iso_code) covidTable = table [
    {iso_code: "AFG", country: "Afghanistan", cases: 159303, deaths: 7386, recovered: 146084, active: 5833},
    {iso_code: "SL", country: "Sri Lanka", cases: 598536, deaths: 15243, recovered: 568637, active: 14656},
    {iso_code: "US", country: "USA", cases: 69808350, deaths: 880976, recovered: 43892277, active: 25035097}
];

type ConflictingIsoCodesError record {|
    *http:Conflict;

>     string body;

Reviewer 3: What is the reason to have this as string

## Run the service

Use the [**Run**](/learn/vs-code-extension/run-a-program/) CodeLens of the VS Code extension to build and run the service, as shown below.

![Run the service](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/run-the-service.gif)

> >**Info:** Alternatively, you can run this service by navigating to the project root (i.e., the `write-a-restful-api` directory) and executing the `bal run` command. The console should have warning logs related to the isolatedness of resources. It is a built-in service concurrency safety feature of Ballerina.

Reviewer 2: Shall we add a link to https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#concurrency-safety.

Author: Added.

## Run the service

Use the [**Run**](/learn/vs-code-extension/run-a-program/) CodeLens of the VS Code extension to build and run the service, as shown below.

![Run the service](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/run-the-service.gif)

>**Info:** Alternatively, you can run this service by navigating to the project root (i.e., the `covid19` directory) and executing the `bal run` command. The console should have warning logs related to the isolatedness of resources. It is a built-in service concurrency safety feature of Ballerina.

You can view the output below in the Terminal.

```
Compiling source

> 	ballerina/covid19:0.1.0

Reviewer 2: Shall we use a different org name? ballerina is reserved for the ballerina platform.

Author: Changed back to `example`.

Running executable
```

## Try the service

Use the [**Try it**](/learn/vs-code-extension/try-the-services/try-http-services/) CodeLens of the VS Code extension to send a request to the service to try out the use case.

### Get all countries

Retrieve all the available records of all countries, as shown below.

![Get all countries](/learn/images/featured-scenarios/write-a-restful-api-with-ballerina/get-all-countries.gif)

### Add a country by the ISO code 

Add a record of a country by its ISO code, as shown below.

> 

Reviewer 2: Let's give the snippet you enter as the payload here. Users can then just copy it and try it out.

Author: Added.
